VeriFast for Rust test cases and examples
=========================================

Subdirectories:
- `unverified`: contains some library crates used by the verified examples, but which have not been verified themselves. However, a specification for their API is available in their `spec` subdirectories.
- `purely_unsafe`: some purely unsafe examples that have been verified using VeriFast to have no undefined behavior.
- `safe_abstraction`: some examples of crates offering functions that are verified using VeriFast to be safe for use by typechecked code but that use `unsafe` code internally. This functionality is based on the ideas of the [RustBelt](https://plv.mpi-sws.org/rustbelt/) project.

Open an example in the VeriFast IDE (`bin/vfide`) to verify it. After verifying a program, you can inspect a function's symbolic execution tree by choosing Show execution tree and selecting the function in the drop-down menu in the upper right corner of the VeriFast window. Click any node in the tree to step through the symbolic execution path leading up to that node and inspect the symbolic heap, symbolic store (local variable bindings), and path condition at each step in a debugger-like experience.

To verify all examples using the command-line tool, run `mysh testsuite.mysh`.

Disclaimer:
- We aim for VeriFast to be sound (i.e. to report "0 errors found" only if no execution of the input program has undefined behavior and safe functions comply with their type's interpretation as defined by RustBelt); however, in contrast to some other tools such as [RefinedRust](https://plv.mpi-sws.org/refinedrust/), VeriFast itself has not been formally verified, so unknown bugs are almost certainly present in the tool that may cause the tool to report "0 errors found" incorrectly in some cases. There may also be known unsoundnesses; these should all be recorded either here or as [issues](https://github.com/verifast/verifast/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3Aunsoundness) with label `unsoundness`.
- One known unsoundness is that VeriFast currently does not fully verify Rust's [pointer aliasing rules](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/behavior-considered-undefined.html) (as made more precise by the [Tree Borrows](https://perso.crans.org/vanille/treebor/) model). It does verify that the memory pointed to by a shared reference is immutable while the shared reference is used, but for now it treats mutable reference creation as if it was raw pointer creation. This means it does not check that the new mutable reference is properly aligned and non-dangling on creation; it only checks this when a load or store is performed through the pointer. It also does not check the aliasing restrictions for mutable references or boxes, and it does not check that references passed as arguments to a function call stay alive for the duration of the call. Otherwise, barring bugs, it should verify all [sources of undefined behavior](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/behavior-considered-undefined.html).
